DOC Document warning for allowed hosts (#692)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/08_Changelogs/5.4.0.md

### Logged warning if allowed hosts have not been configured {#allowed-hosts-warning}

If [`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) is not set, the "host" header is used by Silverstripe CMS to determine what the host name is for your project. This is useful when creating absolute URLs, e.g. for use in emails.

Notably this is used in [`Director::host()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::host()), which in turn is called by many methods including [`Director::hostName()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::hostName()), [`Director::protocolAndHost()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::protocolAndHost()), [`Director::is_site_url()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::is_site_url()), and [`Director::absoluteURL()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::absoluteURL()).

Ideally your hosting will reject invalid host headers. For example Apache allows you to define valid hosts as part of the virtual host configuration, and a Web Application Firewall (WAF) can also be configured to validate the host header. However if your hosting is set to allow *any* host header, your project might be vulnerable to host header injection attacks.

> You can configure Silverstripe CMS to validate the host header, which is an extra layer of protection against this type of attack. While you should have appropriate validation at a hosting level, it is best practice to also configure this in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should configure Silverstripe CMS to validate the host header, which is an extra layer of protection against this type of attack. While you should have appropriate validation at a hosting level, it is best practice to also configure this in your project.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> This configuration has existed since 2016, but we've been alerted that many projects still have not configured their hosting nor their project to adequately validate host headers. To help prompt developers, we've added a warning which will be logged if the configuration is not set.

Reviewer: > To help prompt developers, we've added a warning which will be logged if the configuration is not set.

This bit needs a lot more prominence, since it is the actual change.  If should basically be in its own paragraph and say "If you haven't configured SS_ALLOWED_HOSTS, or set some of the new YML (which you should either add an example of in this change log, or link direclty to an example in docs)", then yours logs will now fill up with warnings.

Reviewer 2: It is already it's own paragraph? I've added _another_ paragraph afterward with wording similar to the language you've suggested.

> or  set some of the new YML (which you should either add an example of in this change log, or link direclty to an example in docs)

The YAML isn't new. There is a link to the example in the docs - that's the last line in this section. We usually only add code examples for _new_ API, but this API isn't new by any means.

## Features and enhancements

> ### Logged warning if allowed hosts have not been configured {#allowed-hosts-warning}
> 
> If [`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) is not set, the "host" header is used by Silverstripe CMS to determine what the host name is for your project. This is useful when creating absolute URLs, e.g. for use in emails.
> 
> Notably this is used in [`Director::host()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::host()), which in turn is called by many methods including [`Director::hostName()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::hostName()), [`Director::protocolAndHost()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::protocolAndHost()), [`Director::is_site_url()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::is_site_url()), and [`Director::absoluteURL()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::absoluteURL()).
> 
> Ideally your hosting will reject invalid host headers. For example Apache allows you to define valid hosts as part of the virtual host configuration, and a Web Application Firewall (WAF) can also be configured to validate the host header. However if your hosting is set to allow *any* host header, your project might be vulnerable to host header injection attacks.
> 
> You should configure Silverstripe CMS to validate the host header, which is an extra layer of protection against this type of attack. While you should have appropriate validation at a hosting level, it is best practice to also configure this in your project.
> 
> This configuration has existed since 2016, but we've been alerted that many projects still have not configured their hosting nor their project to adequately validate host headers. To help prompt developers, we've added a warning which will be logged if the configuration is not set.
> 
> If you haven't configured your allowed hosts, then the new warning will be logged once for each request.
> 
> You can learn more about the relevant configuration in the [secure coding](/developer_guides/security/secure_coding/#request-hostname-forgery) documentation.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Logged warning if allowed hosts have not been configured {#allowed-hosts-warning}

If your site does not have one of the following configured, then a warning will now be logged on every request:

- `SS_ALLOWED_HOSTS` environment variable
- [`AllowedHostsMiddleware.AllowedHosts`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Middleware\AllowedHostsMiddleware->AllowedHosts) property
- [`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) property

If one of those is not set, then the "host" HTTP request header is used by Silverstripe CMS to determine what the host name is for your project. This is used when creating absolute URLs, e.g. for use in emails that link back to the site.

Ideally your hosting will reject invalid host headers. For example Apache allows you to define valid hosts as part of the virtual host configuration, and a Web Application Firewall (WAF) can also be configured to validate the host header. However if your hosting is set to allow *any* host header, your project might be vulnerable to host header injection attacks.

You should configure Silverstripe CMS to validate the host header, which is an extra layer of protection against this type of attack. While you should have appropriate validation at a hosting level, it is best practice to also configure this in your project.

This configuration has existed since 2016, but we've been alerted that many projects still have not configured their hosting nor their project to adequately validate host headers. To help prompt developers, we've added a warning which will be logged if the configuration is not set.

You can learn more about the relevant configuration in the [secure coding](/developer_guides/security/secure_coding/#request-hostname-forgery) documentation.

```

Reviewer: The most important info should be up the top, in this case it's saying that if you are missing some configuration then you'll get logged warnings

Reviewer 2: > ``[`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) property``

Not relevant here. The warning is still logged if you have that set. All that changes is whether the host header is used by `Director::host()` or not.

> If one of those is not set, then the "host" HTTP request header is used by Silverstripe CMS to determine what the host name is for your project.

Not quite. The host header will still be used if you have allowed hosts set too - that's kinda the whole point.

I've moved that one bit to the top - the rest I've left the same as it already is. If you want to change a specific paragraph, please suggest changes to each paragraph individually so it's easy to comment and respond to. Changing all of it in a single diff is really hard to respond to - let alone see what specific changes you're suggesting.

Reviewer: >  Not relevant here. The warning is still logged if you have that set.

OK, so if that makes it so that host header is not used by Director::host(), then won't that mean that host header injection isn't possible because the host headers aren't used? i.e. links in an email back to the site will just use alternate_base_url ... or in that instance do they still use the host header?

Reviewer 2: In theory they will use the alternate base URL instead of the host header _when using `Director::host()`_ - which is an important caveat.

If the host header is accessed anywhere else, an injection attack could still be possible, so I think we should continue to warn about not having allowed hosts config set even if `alternate_base_url` is set.

Reviewer: I honestly think there's too much nuance in Director.alternate_base_url / Director::host() and it does more harm then good mentioning them. It's very distracting, particularly since they're at the top.

The key thing that people need to know is that you host header injection may be possible is some scenarios, therefore you need to set either an env variable or some yml configure in your application to limit allowed hosts

Reviewer 2: I've removed the note about `alternate_base_url`

## Features and enhancements

### Logged warning if allowed hosts have not been configured {#allowed-hosts-warning}

If your site does not have one of the following configured, then a warning will now be logged on every request:

- `SS_ALLOWED_HOSTS` environment variable
- [`AllowedHostsMiddleware.AllowedHosts`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Middleware\AllowedHostsMiddleware->AllowedHosts) property

> If [`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) is not set, the "host" header is used by Silverstripe CMS to determine what the host name is for your project. This is useful when creating absolute URLs, e.g. for use in emails.
> 
> Notably this is used in [`Director::host()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::host()), which in turn is called by many methods including [`Director::hostName()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::hostName()), [`Director::protocolAndHost()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::protocolAndHost()), [`Director::is_site_url()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::is_site_url()), and [`Director::absoluteURL()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::absoluteURL()).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If [`Director.alternate_base_url`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director->alternate_base_url) is set then it is often used instead instead of the "host" HTTP request header for determining the URL of the website. However there may be some scenarios where the host header is still used, so having `alternate_base_url` configured by itself will not prevent a warning be logged if allowed hosts are not configured.
```

Maybe this?

Reviewer 2: Based on https://github.com/silverstripe/developer-docs/pull/692#discussion_r1955319621 it sounds like referencing `alternate_base_url` was confusing, so I've removed that and left the rest.

I.e. it doesn't matter that sometimes some methods won't use the host header if `alternate_base_url` is set - but it is useful to know some of the common methods that _do usually_ use the host header.
